Title: It’s Easy Being Green (Open Access)
Author: Frank Farach  
Date: 2013-10-25 12:00

*This is the first installment of the Open Science Toolkit, a recurring
feature that outlines practical steps individuals and organizations can
take to make science more open and reproducible.*

<img src="/images/FrankFarachHeadshotBWSmall.jpg" alt="Photo of Frank
Farach" align="left" style="padding-right: 20px;" width="100px">

Congratulations! Your manuscript has been peer reviewed and accepted for
publication in a journal. The journal is owned by a major publisher who
wants you to know that, for $3,000, you can make your article open
access (OA) forever. Anyone in the world with access to the Internet
will have access to your article, which may be cited more often because
of its OA status. Otherwise, the journal would be happy to make your
paper available to subscribers and others willing to pay a fee.

Does this sound familiar? It sure does to me. For many years, when I
heard about Open Access (OA) to scientific research, it was always about
making an article freely available in a peer-reviewed journal -- the
so-called “gold” OA option -- often at considerable expense. I liked the
idea of making my work available to the widest possible audience, but
the costs were too prohibitive.

As it turns out, however, the “[best-kept
secret](http://legacy.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/overview.htm)” of OA is
that you can make your work OA for free by self-archiving it in an OA
repository, even if it has already been published in a non-OA journal.
Such “green” OA is possible because [many
journals](http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo/statistics.php?la=en&fIDnum=%7C&mode=simple)
have already provided blanket permission for authors to deposit their
peer-reviewed manuscript in an OA repository.

The flowchart below shows how easy it is to make your prior work OA. The
key is to make sure you follow the self-archiving policy of the journal
your work was published in, and to deposit the work in a suitable
repository.  

<img src="/images/GreenOASmall.png" alt="Flowchart showing how to
archive your research" align="left" width="650px">

Journals typically display their self-archiving and copyright policies
on their websites, but you can also search for them in the
[SHERPA/RoMEO](http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo/) database, which has a
nicely curated collection of policies from 1,333 publishers.  The
database assigns a code to journals based on how far in the publication
process their permissions extend.  It distinguishes between a pre-print,
which is the version of the manuscript before it underwent peer review,
and a post-print, the peer-reviewed version before the journal
copyedited and typeset it. Few journals allow you to self-archive their
copyedited PDF version of your article, but many let you do so for the
pre-print or post-print version. Unfortunately, some journals don’t
provide blanket permission for self-archiving, or require you to wait
for an embargo period to end before doing so. If you run into this
problem, you should contact the journal and ask for permission to
deposit the non-copyedited version of your article in an OA repository.

It has also become easy to find a suitable OA repository in which to
deposit your work. Your first stop should be the [Directory of Open
Access Repositories](http://www.opendoar.org) (OpenDOAR), which
currently lists over 2,200 institutional, disciplinary, and universal
repositories. Although an article deposited in an OA repository will be
available to anyone with Internet access, repositories differ in feature
sets and policies. For example, some repositories, like
[fig**share**](http://figshare.com/cc_license), automatically assign a
[CC BY](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/) license to all
publicly shared papers; others, like [Open
Depot](http://opendepot.org/), allow you to [choose a
license](http://creativecommons.org/choose/) before making the article
public. A good OA repository will tell you how it ensures the long-term
digital preservation of your content as well as what metadata it exposes
to search engines and web services.

Once you’ve deposited your article in an OA repository, consider making
others aware of its existence. Link to it on your website, mention it on
social media, or add it to your CV.

In honor of Open Access Week, I am issuing a “Green OA Challenge” to
readers of this blog who have published at least one peer-reviewed
article. The challenge is to self-archive one of your articles in an OA
repository and link to it in the comments below. Please also feel free
to share any comments you have about the self-archiving process or about
green OA. Happy archiving!
