Title: Welcome!
Author: OSC
Date: 2013-10-02 10:15

Welcome to the blog of the Open Science Collaboration! We are a loose network of researchers, professionals, citizen scientists, and others with an interest in open science, metascience, and good scientific practices.  We’ll be writing about:

- Open science topics like reproducibility, transparency in methods and analyses, and changing editorial and publication practices
- Updates on open science initiatives like the [Reproducibility Project](https://openscienceframework.org/reproducibility/‎) and opportunities to get involved in new projects like the [Archival Project](http://archivalproject.org/)
- Interviews and opinions from researchers, developers, publishers, and citizen scientists working to make science more transparent, rigorous, or reproducible. 

We hope that the blog will stimulate open discussion and help improve the way science is done!

If you'd like to suggest a topic for a post, propose a guest post or column, or get involved with moderation, promotion, or technical development, we would love to hear from you! Email us at [oscbloggers@gmail.com](mailto:oscbloggers@gmail.com) or tweet @OSCbloggers.

The OSC is an open collaboration - anyone is welcome to join, contribute to discussions, or develop a project. The OSC blog is supported by the [Center for Open Science](http://centerforopenscience.org), a non-profit organization dedicated to increasing openness, integrity and reproducibility of scientific research.  
