Title: Authors

The following people are regular contributors to the Open Science Collaboration blog:

__Frank Farach, Ph.D.__ is a Staff Scientist with [Prometheus Research](http://www.prometheusresearch.com/) and was, until recently, a Research Scientist in Clinical Psychology at the University of Washington. His interest in open science comes from a passion for making scientific research more efficient and effective through greater transparency, accessibility, and reproducibility. Frank contributes to the OSC Blog as Editor of and contributor to the Open Science Toolkit, a recurring feature that highlights practical steps that individuals can take to promote greater openness and reproducibility in scientific research.

__Denny Borsboom, Ph.D.__ is Professor of Psychological Methods at the University of Amsterdam. He has worked on topics in measurement theory, psychometrics, and philosophical psychology. As a methodologist, he has for a long time been worried about the limited access that researchers have to each other’s experimental protocols, research data, and analysis scripts. Denny writes regular posts on methodology and philosophy of science, as they relate to openness.

__[Brian Nosek](http://briannosek.com/)__ is an Associate Professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of Virginia and co-founder of the [Center for Open Science](http://centerforopenscience.org/).  His research interest is in the gap between values and practices - what people desire to do versus what they actually do.  His involvement in open science is a practical application of that research interest.  Can the core values of openness and reproducibility be better integrated into daily scientific practice? 

__Jon Grahe__ is a Professor in the Department of Psychology at Pacific Lutheran University. Although he used to study interpersonal perception, he long ago focused most of his scholarship time to guiding undergraduate research projects. His own research interests then drifted toward the pedagogy of research methods and capstone courses, and now supports open science initiatives such as the [Collaborative Replications and Education Project (CREP)](https://openscienceframework.org/project/WFC6u/wiki/home) in his role as Western VP of [Psi Chi](http://www.psichi.org/) and an Executive Editor for the [Journal of Social Psychology](http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?show=aimsScope&journalCode=vsoc20#.UkuPtqzleSo). His role at the blog will be posts on connecting open science ideals to the classroom and updating readers on opportunities to participate, and progress of, crowd-sourced science projects. 

__Shauna Gordon-McKeon__ is a programmer and educator who works and volunteers for a variety of “open” causes, including open science, open source software, open government, and open medicine.  Her primary role at the OSC blog will be managing content relating to statistical methods and research practices, as well as moderating two monthly features: a journal club and a series of short interviews on rotating topics.

__Etienne LeBel__ is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Psychology at Montclair State University and is founder of PsychDisclosure.org. He conducts substantive research in the area of social cognition, but has increasingly become interested in meta-scientific topics related to openness and replication. He is particularly interested in the different causal connections between openness and replication. For example, how open materials influence the routine execution of independent replication and consequently the research culture regarding the role of independent replications in knowledge development. He will be writing about replicability issues as it relates to openness and changes in editorial and publication practices.

__Åse Innes-Ker__ is a “Universitetslektor” at Lund University in Sweden. She has a background in Cognitive Science and Social Psychology with an emphasis on Emotion, but have also published on meta-cognition within Forensic Psychology. She heads a loose network of Emotion Researchers called [NEER](http://neerpsy.se/index.html) at Lund University where some of the projects are cross-disciplinary work on film-cognition and emotion. In her spare time, she thinks, and blogs about, fixing science.  

_The Open Science Collaboration welcomes new contributors.  If you'd like to write a guest post or become a regular contributor, contact us via email at oscbloggers@gmail.com or tweet @OSCbloggers._

